"Repo for NLP2 projects" 

# Tasks
## Task 0: preprocessing
In this task we preprocess all sentences and replace all words that are not in the grammar with `OOV`. Then we forget about the original sentences in `data/dev.en` and only use `data/dev-ooved.en` afterwards. Technically, there is no need to think about this; the helper can fetch all sentences: `Helper.get_sentences()`.

## Task 1: input transducers
In this task the English source sentences are converted into transducers. These transducers are stored as `data/input/input-i.*` where `i` is the line-number and the extension follows the naming conventions (see below).

Word-positions are one- rather than zero-based. The label index 0 always corresponds to the empty word `<eps>`. This avoids confusion when for example generating n-shortest-paths FSTs, where empty, initial segments are labeled `0:0` by OpenFST.

* `data/1-inputs/`
    * `input-i.*`: the input FST (`*` can be *txtfst, fst, isyms, osyms*)

## Task 2: phrase table transducers.
Here the phrase tables as given in `grammar.i` are turned into transducers. First, all grammars are appended with an `OOV:OOV` rule. We follow the suggestion in the instructions for the representation of multi-word phrases: first all source words are detected, then all target words returned. Every phrase thus gets its own closed path. 

The weights of the connections are determined using a log-linear model, whose feature weights have already been trained (see `weights.monotone`).

* Output dir:** `data/2-phrase-tables/`
    * `phrase-table-i.*`

## Task 3: monotone translation.
In task 3, the input transducers and phrase table transducers from task 1 and 2 respectively are composed into a translation transducer that turns English sentence positions into Japanese phrases.

Prior to composition, the out-symbols of the input FST (i.e. the file `input-i.osyms`) are (virtually) replaced by the in-symbols of the phrase table FST (i.e. the file `phrase-table-i.isyms`). As explained in the section *Notes* below, this prevents problems that occur when certain i-symbols of the phrase table FST are not present in the input FST. Typically, this is the case for `OOV`, since we add that to every grammar.

* **Output dir:** `data/3-mono-translations/`
    * `mono-translation-i.*` the FST composed from input and phrase-table transducers. These files are generated by the funcion `generate_mono_translation_fsts` in `task3.py`.
*  **Output dir:** `data/4-best-mono-translations/`
    * `mono-translation-i.100best.*`: FST with the top 100 best translations in terms of shortest-paths. Generated by the function `generate_best_derivations_fsts`.
    * `monotone.100best.i`: textfile with the 100 best derivations of sentence `i`; using the `phrase |start:end| phrase |start:end|` format. Generated by the function `generate_best_derivations_fsts`.
    * `monotone.100best.i.full`: textfile with the 100 best translations, derivations and weights of sentence `i`. Translation, derivations and weights are separated by ` ||| `. Translations are just text; derivations follow the above format. Generated by the function `generate_best_derivations_fsts`

# Architecture

## FST Class
The FST class is our custom wrapper around the command line interface for OpenFST. It should make dealing with all those different files much easier and more streamlined, as the class will always respect the naming conventions (see below). The FST class is initialized using its (file) base. An example...

```python
from FST import *

my_fst = FST("../data/input/input-0")
my_fst.compile()
my_fst.sort()
my_fsts.draw() # Look at ../data/input/input-0.pdf!
# Or my_fst.compile().sort().draw()
```

## Helper Class
This class has a simple goal: to help. It contains some useful function (non FST-specific), that are used in all tasks. Also, it contains global options such as the number of sentences, some directories, filenames etc. Within a given task, we typically extend the class, so that we can easily access those niceties. 

The syntax for that is pretty straight-forward:
```python
from Helper import *

# In my_file.py, *outside* the Helper class definition
def my_function(self, argument):
    N = self.num_sentences # this is a property of your Helper object
    return N 

# Save `my_function` as a method of the Helper class
Helper.a_great_function = my_function

my_helper = Helper()
print my_helper.my_function() # Prints the number of sentences
```

## Naming conventions

FSTs are described by several files. We assume that files belonging to the same FST have the same name, but different extensions. The extensions used are the following:

* `.txtfst` A text file describing the fst
* `.fst` A compiled fst
* `.isyms` A text file with in-labels
* `.osyms` A text file with out-labels

The `FST` class also crucially relies on these naming conventions. 

## Glossary
Some (weird) terminology:

* **base** refers to the path of a file, without (optional suffix) and extension. So the base of `/data/inputs/input-0.fst` is `/data/inputs/input`. So an FST has one base, but multiple files associated to it.
* ...

# Notes
## OpenFST composition
When you compose two FSTs that have mismatching in-out labels, weird things happen. More precisely, suppose you compose `FST1` (input) and `FST2` (phrase table):
```
    FST1: (0) ---[0:the]--- (1) ---[2:cat]--- (2)
    FST2: (0) ---[the:le; foo:bar]--- (1)
```
Since `cat` is not an input label of `FST2`, it seems to ignore the label values, and only use the indices (as specified in the in- and out-symbols). That gives unexpected results.

**Bottom line:** In any case, weird things happens if there is an input label in `FST2` that is *not* in `FST1`. In particular, when there is an `OOV:OOV` in the phrase table, but there is no `OOV` in the input sentence (and hence no `OOV` output label in `FST1`). This will in fact often happen in our setup, as we add the `OOV:OOV` rule to *every* grammar, even if there is no `OOV` in the input sentence.

However, there is an easy fix: we only have to make sure that the output labels of the input FST are a *super set* of the input labels of the phrase table FST.  After preprocessing, we can assume that the phrase table is sufficient (i.e. actually covers the input sentence). So then we can just use the input symbols of the phrase table FST as the output symbols of the input FST. This might result in superfluous output labels for the input FST (e.g. a superflous `OOV` output symbol), but who cares?



